To launch scripts within Illustrator, select File->Scripts->Other Script...
or use keystroke fn+cmd+F12

To add scripts to the default menu within File->Scripts:
add the files to <Adobe Illustrator>/Presets/en_US/Scripts


.scpt files must be run from within Illustrator in this way, and .jsx files
CAN be run from within Illustrator in this way. .jsx files can also be run by
double-clicking (in a folder outside of Illustrator). .app files must be run by
double-clicking in the same way.
These distinctions are reflected by the folders in which the relevant files are
stored (“WithinIllustrator”, “OutsideIllustrator” and so on).

Some .app files require permissions to run. If they are failing to run, go to
System Preferences->Security & Privacy and select the Privacy tab and Accessibility
menu. The relevant .app file should have an icon on the list of apps requiring 
permission (provided an attempt has been made to execute it) and you should grant
it permission by selecting its check box (inputting username and password as necessary)

The benefit of files requiring permissions is that in the context of this package, it 
is those files that bypass the use of Actions (like those in the Actions panel of 
Illustrator). If a script has suffix NoActions.app, this means it does not trigger 
Actions, while if it has suffix WithActions…, then Actions are called, so it relies on
Default Actions having been updated (re the note in the “Add to Illustrator” folder).


NOTES ON SCRIPTS INCLUDED:

takeSymbolsFromPDFBlankDoc.jsx
The intended target for this script is one of the Lilypond Music Font PDF files included
in this package in the Lilypond source files and PDFs folder. The script extracts all the
symbols, puts them in the symbols panel of the Illustrator interface in a new blank 
document. An easy way to set up your musical workspace.

REQUIRES (No requirements)

MultiExporterForParts.jsx
This script is due to Tom Byrne and Matthew Ericson 
(https://gist.github.com/TomByrne/7816376), so it is the only script not the work of the 
author, but it is an ideal addition to the music package for the purposes of making parts. 
If a composer is working on a score, he/ she may ultimately wish to make parts for 
individual performers within a larger ensemble. The music that they play from will 
not contain all of the staves from the score (only those relevant to them, e.g. the 
Trumpet staves).
A brief note about layout of musical scores within Illustrator:
It will be important to keep and their contents separate that belong to different 
instruments in the score. For this purpose, the user should use “layers” in Illustrator
to separate out notation belonging to different players. The createStave script (described
below) is ideally suited to this task of encapsulation.
With the layer break down of a musical score in place, for the purposes of making parts it
will be necessary to export only certain layers. This is precisely what MultiExporter
achieves. Run the script, choose the relevant layers, and export (as PNG24). Now in a 
new file (which we will call file 2, and will not contain edits to the content of notation 
but will merely display it for print in a different form), we select File->Place… and 
choose a layer that we would like to place in the new file (this layer will be saved as a 
PNG). Changes made in the score will be reflected in file 2. Simply rerun the script, 
export to the same file location and update the link in the links menu of file 2 (if it 
is not updated automatically).We have achieved “Dynamic Parts”, a feature prized by high
end music notation software packages like Sibelius (other software is available…)!

REQUIRES an open file with layers

createCueSizeStave (various suffixes)
Often we will want certain staves on the page to be different sizes (perhaps before 
exporting to another file - e.g. to hold parts - see MultiExporter above). Scaling 
using the mouse distorts symbols and relationships. That’s where this script comes
in: to keep a proportional and legible stave, merely smaller in size.

REQUIRES a stave and its associated contents selected (see below for making stave)

makeStave (various suffixes)
This script underpins the whole music notation model we are supporting with Illustrator.
As mentioned in the above description of MusicExporter, we want to encapsulate
stafflines within and underneath meaningful pieces of musical notation placed above
the stave and all belonging to a single instrument. If we start with a layer then,
that will be associated with a certain instrument, we want a way of creating a sublayer
that only contains (a set of 5) stafflines.That is precisely what this script achieves.
Simply draw a line or path within a document and ensure that it is selected. Then by
running this script the line/ path will be transformed into a set of 5 encapsulated 
stafflines of the right thickness and distance separating them (staves are 7mm from top
to bottom, which is standard) in a sublayer within the original layer.

REQUIRES a selected path/ line


See the hand tool plug-in for further music notation functionality.

